# Closed Loop Experiment Manager (CLEM) – A Simple and Inexpensive System for Multichannel, Closed Loop Electrophysiological Experimentation
There is growing need for multichannel electrophysiological systems that record from and interact with neuronal systems in near real-time. Such systems are needed, for example, for closed loop, multichannel electrophysiological / optogenetic experimentation in vivo and in a variety of other neuronal preparations, or for developing and testing neuro-prosthetic devices, to name a few. Furthermore, there is a need for such systems to be inexpensive, reliable, user friendly, easy to set-up, open and expandable, and possess long life cycles in face of rapidly changing computing environments. Finally, they should provide powerful yet reasonably easy to implement facilities for developing closed-loop protocols for interacting with neuronal systems. Here we survey commercial and open source systems that partially address these needs. We then present our own solution, which we refer to as Closed Loop Experiments Manager (CLEM). CLEM is an open source, soft real-time, Microsoft Windows desktop application that is based on an inexpensive, general-purpose data acquisition board and a generic personal computer. CLEM provides a fully functional, user-friendly graphical interface, possesses facilities for recording, presenting and logging electrophysiological data from up to 64 analog channels, and facilities for interacting with external devices, such as stimulators, through digital and analog interfaces. Importantly, it includes facilities for running closed-loop protocols written in any programming language that can generate dynamic link libraries (DLLs). We describe the application, its architecture and facilities and demonstrate its abilities to interact with networks of cortical neurons growing on multielectrode arrays. 

